## Introduction
With the commodification of health care services, access to health insurance becomes essential for citizens to be protected from unexpected financial loss due to illnesses and injuries, especially for low-income populations. While the Canadian government provides health plans to cover citizens’ basic medical services, many people still need private insurance to cover additional healthcare needs. In contrast, countries like the United States, which lacks universal healthcare, rely entirely on private insurance markets. Insurance companies calculate rates for individuals by assessing risks based on factors such as age, sex, and lifestyle. Among these, the habit of smoking is considered an important factor as it is associated with many negative health consequences – people who smoke are about 25 times more likely than non-smokers to develop lung cancer(National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (US) Office on Smoking and Health, 2014), and smoking increases the risk of coronary heart disease and stroke by 2 to 4 times (CDC, 2024). Research also shows that smoking leads to excess medical care where the medical costs for male smokers are 11% more than non-smokers (Izumi et al., 2001). Insurance companies rely on these risk factors to assess the potential medical expenses they need to cover and determine the insurance prices for beneficiaries.

Given these considerations, we want to investigate how smoking impacts the medical charges covered by insurance companies and explore other factors that might contribute to the variation of the amount of charges paid by insurance. This will provide valuable insights into how lifestyle choices, particularly smoking, influence the cost of health insurance and the extent of coverage. This information can help individuals make informed decisions about their health behaviors and financial planning. This study can also inform policymakers and insurance providers about the equity and efficiency of insurance pricing models. 
